README.md, before:

# ARISE-MDS Sensor Portal
 
This is a shareable version of the ARISE-MDS sensor portal. It is currently a work in progress. This documentation will be updated when the code approaches a release. Please note this branch is very much a WIP, and there may be a risk of breaking changes occasionally.

## Contributors

- Johanne Burns Bergan
- Sander Stenbakk Ekanger
- Jacob Gullesen Hagen
- Ingrid Helene Kvitnes
- Noah Lund Syrdal
- Siri Arnesen
- Marius Bølset Gisleberg


## Starting the project for the first time
```bash
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml build
```

```bash
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml up
```

### Init database & super user:

```bash
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml exec sensor_portal_django python manage.py migrate


## if you have changes which have not yet been applied. 
# open the database
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml exec sensor_portal_db psql -U postgres
# enter the correct database
\c postgres

DO $$
DECLARE
    r RECORD;
BEGIN
    FOR r IN (
        SELECT tablename
        FROM pg_tables
        WHERE schemaname = current_schema()
        AND tablename != 'spatial_ref_sys'
    )
    LOOP
        EXECUTE 'DROP TABLE IF EXISTS ' || quote_ident(r.tablename) || ' CASCADE';
    END LOOP;
END $$;

-- Drop the PostGIS extension
DROP EXTENSION IF EXISTS postgis CASCADE;
-- Then drop all other tables
DO $$
DECLARE
    r RECORD;
BEGIN
    FOR r IN (SELECT tablename FROM pg_tables WHERE schemaname = current_schema())
    LOOP
        EXECUTE 'DROP TABLE IF EXISTS ' || quote_ident(r.tablename) || ' CASCADE';
    END LOOP;
END $$;
-- Recreate PostGIS extension if needed
CREATE EXTENSION postgis;


### to exit postgres shell
\q
```


### then run migrations again
```bash
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml exec sensor_portal_django python manage.py migrate
```
```bash
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml exec sensor_portal_django python manage.py createsuperuser
```

## Audio Data Management

The sensor portal uses Google Cloud Storage (GCS) to store and manage audio files. For local development, we provide a fake GCS implementation that works without real GCS credentials.

### Directory Structure

This system expects audio files from the NINA project directory with the following structure:

```
proj_tabmon_NINA/
├── bugg_RPiID-10000000d2b4d01e/
│   ├── audio_files/
│   │   ├── bugg_RPiID-10000000d2b4d01e_20240316_123000_16kHz.wav
│   │   └── ...
└── bugg_RPiID-10000000d642707c/
    ├── audio_files/
    │   ├── bugg_RPiID-10000000d642707c_20240317_083000_16kHz.wav
    │   └── ...
```

### Importing Audio Files with Fake GCS

Initialize the fake GCS environment and import audio files in two steps:

```bash
# Step 1: Initialize fake GCS environment
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml exec sensor_portal_django python manage.py fake_gcs --init

# Step 2: Import audio files (cleans existing data first)
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml exec sensor_portal_django python manage.py direct_audio_import --clean
```

This will:
- Create device-specific buckets in fake GCS
- Copy audio files into these buckets
- Create database records for devices, deployments, and files
- Import all deployment details from config files (location, dates, settings, etc.)
- Link everything together properly

### Resulting Storage Structure

After import, files are organized in device-specific buckets:

```
/file_storage/fake_gcs/
├── audio-files-10000000d642707c/      # Device bucket
│   ├── 2024-06-19T23_51_04.502Z.mp3   # Audio files
│   └── ...
├── audio-files-10000000d2b4d01e/      # Another device bucket
│   ├── 2024-06-14T23_43_06.117Z.mp3
│   └── ...
```

### Data Relationships

```
Device (10000000d642707c)
  │
  └── Deployment (NINA_10000000d642707c-Audio-1)
        │
        └── DataFiles (audio recordings in the device bucket)
```

### Accessing Audio Files

1. **API (recommended)**:
   ```
   GET /api/deployments/{deployment_id}/files/
   ```

2. **Command line**:
   ```bash
   # List files in a device bucket
   docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml exec sensor_portal_django \
     python manage.py fake_gcs --list-files audio-files-10000000d642707c
   ```

### Working with Audio Files

```bash
# List all device buckets
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml exec sensor_portal_django \
  python manage.py fake_gcs --list-device-buckets

# Upload a new audio file to a device bucket
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml exec sensor_portal_django \
  python manage.py fake_gcs --upload-file path/to/file.mp3 \
  --bucket audio-files-10000000d642707c --destination file.mp3
```

### File Format Support

The system supports various audio formats:
- MP3 (.mp3)
- WAV (.wav)
- M4A (.m4a)

### Filename Parsing

For best metadata extraction, audio files should follow this naming convention:
```
bugg_RPiID-DEVICEID_YYYYMMDD_HHMMSS_CONFIG.wav
```

The system will extract:
- Device ID from the filename
- Recording date and time
- Configuration information (e.g., sample rate)

## Data Flow from Backend to Frontend

The ARISE-MDS sensor portal uses a Django REST Framework backend to serve data to a React frontend. Here's how to ensure data flows correctly:

### API Endpoints

The primary way data gets sent from the backend to the frontend is through RESTful API endpoints:

```bash
# List available API endpoints

```

Common endpoints include:
- `/api/datafiles/` - Access audio and sensor data files
- `/api/deployments/` - Access deployment information
- `/api/devices/` - Access device information
- `/api/sites/` - Access site information
- `/api/projects/` - Access project information

### Checking API Responses

To verify data is being sent correctly:

1. Using the Django Admin Interface:
   - Navigate to http://localhost:8080/admin/ 
   - Log in with your superuser credentials
   - Browse to various model pages to confirm data exists

2. Testing API endpoints directly:
   - Visit http://localhost:8080/api/ in your browser
   - Use the browsable API to explore endpoints and verify data

3. Using curl from command line:
   ```bash
   # Example to fetch all devices
   curl -H "Accept: application/json" -H "Content-Type: application/json" http://localhost:8000/api/devices/
   ```

### Debugging Data Flow Issues

If data isn't appearing in the frontend:

1. Check Django logs for errors:
   ```bash
   docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml logs sensor_portal_django
   ```

2. Verify the API is returning expected data:
   ```bash
   # Using httpie (if installed)
   http GET http://localhost:8000/api/devices/
   ```

3. Check for CORS issues in browser developer console (F12)

4. Ensure frontend API calls include proper authentication if required:
   ```javascript
   // Example React fetch with authentication
   fetch('/api/devices/', {
     headers: {
       'Authorization': `Token ${authToken}`,
       'Content-Type': 'application/json'
     }
   })
   .then(response => response.json())
   .then(data => console.log(data));
   ```

### Creating Custom API Endpoints

If you need to create new endpoints to expose data:

1. Add a serializer in `sensor_portal/serializers.py`
2. Add a viewset in `sensor_portal/views.py`
3. Register the viewset in `sensor_portal/urls.py`
4. Restart the Django container:
   ```bash
   docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml restart sensor_portal_django
   ```



### End-to-End (E2E) Testing

E2E testing verifies that the full application works as intended in an integrated environment. These tests mimic real user journeys from start to finish, ensuring that all layers—frontend, backend, and database—interact correctly. In our project, the E2E suite covers:

- **Authentication and Access**
    - Log in with valid credentials
    - Store the access token in `localStorage`
    - Automatically refresh tokens to maintain the session
- **Loading and Displaying Data**
    - Fetch the deployments list from the API
    - Render key fields (`site_name`, `deployment_ID`) in the table
- **Navigation and Detail Views**
    - Click into a specific deployment’s detail page
    - View associated data files and their metadata (file name, format, quality-check status)
- **User Interactions and API Calls**
    - Click the “Check Quality” button for a data file
    - Assert that the API returns status 200
    - Verify that the UI updates to reflect the API response
- **Robustness and State Handling**
    - Reload pages (`cy.reload()`) to confirm the app preserves state correctly
    - Check that data remains consistent after navigation and actions

### Running the E2E Tests
Before you begin, make sure the application is running as described earlier in this file. Then run: 

```bash
npm install
npx cypress open
```

This will launch Cypress’s test runner, where you can select and execute the “DeploymentsPage” spec (or any other E2E suite) in your browser.

Commit message:

added documentation for backend tests

README.md, after:

# ARISE-MDS Sensor Portal
 
This is a shareable version of the ARISE-MDS sensor portal. It is currently a work in progress. This documentation will be updated when the code approaches a release. Please note this branch is very much a WIP, and there may be a risk of breaking changes occasionally.

## Contributors

- Johanne Burns Bergan
- Sander Stenbakk Ekanger
- Jacob Gullesen Hagen
- Ingrid Helene Kvitnes
- Noah Lund Syrdal
- Siri Arnesen
- Marius Bølset Gisleberg


## Starting the project for the first time
```bash
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml build
```

```bash
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml up
```

### Init database & super user:

```bash
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml exec sensor_portal_django python manage.py migrate


## if you have changes which have not yet been applied. 
# open the database
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml exec sensor_portal_db psql -U postgres
# enter the correct database
\c postgres

DO $$
DECLARE
    r RECORD;
BEGIN
    FOR r IN (
        SELECT tablename
        FROM pg_tables
        WHERE schemaname = current_schema()
        AND tablename != 'spatial_ref_sys'
    )
    LOOP
        EXECUTE 'DROP TABLE IF EXISTS ' || quote_ident(r.tablename) || ' CASCADE';
    END LOOP;
END $$;

-- Drop the PostGIS extension
DROP EXTENSION IF EXISTS postgis CASCADE;
-- Then drop all other tables
DO $$
DECLARE
    r RECORD;
BEGIN
    FOR r IN (SELECT tablename FROM pg_tables WHERE schemaname = current_schema())
    LOOP
        EXECUTE 'DROP TABLE IF EXISTS ' || quote_ident(r.tablename) || ' CASCADE';
    END LOOP;
END $$;
-- Recreate PostGIS extension if needed
CREATE EXTENSION postgis;


### to exit postgres shell
\q
```


### then run migrations again
```bash
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml exec sensor_portal_django python manage.py migrate
```
```bash
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml exec sensor_portal_django python manage.py createsuperuser
```

## Audio Data Management

The sensor portal uses Google Cloud Storage (GCS) to store and manage audio files. For local development, we provide a fake GCS implementation that works without real GCS credentials.

### Directory Structure

This system expects audio files from the NINA project directory with the following structure:

```
proj_tabmon_NINA/
├── bugg_RPiID-10000000d2b4d01e/
│   ├── audio_files/
│   │   ├── bugg_RPiID-10000000d2b4d01e_20240316_123000_16kHz.wav
│   │   └── ...
└── bugg_RPiID-10000000d642707c/
    ├── audio_files/
    │   ├── bugg_RPiID-10000000d642707c_20240317_083000_16kHz.wav
    │   └── ...
```

### Importing Audio Files with Fake GCS

Initialize the fake GCS environment and import audio files in two steps:

```bash
# Step 1: Initialize fake GCS environment
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml exec sensor_portal_django python manage.py fake_gcs --init

# Step 2: Import audio files (cleans existing data first)
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml exec sensor_portal_django python manage.py direct_audio_import --clean
```

This will:
- Create device-specific buckets in fake GCS
- Copy audio files into these buckets
- Create database records for devices, deployments, and files
- Import all deployment details from config files (location, dates, settings, etc.)
- Link everything together properly

### Resulting Storage Structure

After import, files are organized in device-specific buckets:

```
/file_storage/fake_gcs/
├── audio-files-10000000d642707c/      # Device bucket
│   ├── 2024-06-19T23_51_04.502Z.mp3   # Audio files
│   └── ...
├── audio-files-10000000d2b4d01e/      # Another device bucket
│   ├── 2024-06-14T23_43_06.117Z.mp3
│   └── ...
```

### Data Relationships

```
Device (10000000d642707c)
  │
  └── Deployment (NINA_10000000d642707c-Audio-1)
        │
        └── DataFiles (audio recordings in the device bucket)
```

### Accessing Audio Files

1. **API (recommended)**:
   ```
   GET /api/deployments/{deployment_id}/files/
   ```

2. **Command line**:
   ```bash
   # List files in a device bucket
   docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml exec sensor_portal_django \
     python manage.py fake_gcs --list-files audio-files-10000000d642707c
   ```

### Working with Audio Files

```bash
# List all device buckets
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml exec sensor_portal_django \
  python manage.py fake_gcs --list-device-buckets

# Upload a new audio file to a device bucket
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml exec sensor_portal_django \
  python manage.py fake_gcs --upload-file path/to/file.mp3 \
  --bucket audio-files-10000000d642707c --destination file.mp3
```

### File Format Support

The system supports various audio formats:
- MP3 (.mp3)
- WAV (.wav)
- M4A (.m4a)

### Filename Parsing

For best metadata extraction, audio files should follow this naming convention:
```
bugg_RPiID-DEVICEID_YYYYMMDD_HHMMSS_CONFIG.wav
```

The system will extract:
- Device ID from the filename
- Recording date and time
- Configuration information (e.g., sample rate)

## Data Flow from Backend to Frontend

The ARISE-MDS sensor portal uses a Django REST Framework backend to serve data to a React frontend. Here's how to ensure data flows correctly:

### API Endpoints

The primary way data gets sent from the backend to the frontend is through RESTful API endpoints:

```bash
# List available API endpoints

```

Common endpoints include:
- `/api/datafiles/` - Access audio and sensor data files
- `/api/deployments/` - Access deployment information
- `/api/devices/` - Access device information
- `/api/sites/` - Access site information
- `/api/projects/` - Access project information

### Checking API Responses

To verify data is being sent correctly:

1. Using the Django Admin Interface:
   - Navigate to http://localhost:8080/admin/ 
   - Log in with your superuser credentials
   - Browse to various model pages to confirm data exists

2. Testing API endpoints directly:
   - Visit http://localhost:8080/api/ in your browser
   - Use the browsable API to explore endpoints and verify data

3. Using curl from command line:
   ```bash
   # Example to fetch all devices
   curl -H "Accept: application/json" -H "Content-Type: application/json" http://localhost:8000/api/devices/
   ```

### Debugging Data Flow Issues

If data isn't appearing in the frontend:

1. Check Django logs for errors:
   ```bash
   docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml logs sensor_portal_django
   ```

2. Verify the API is returning expected data:
   ```bash
   # Using httpie (if installed)
   http GET http://localhost:8000/api/devices/
   ```

3. Check for CORS issues in browser developer console (F12)

4. Ensure frontend API calls include proper authentication if required:
   ```javascript
   // Example React fetch with authentication
   fetch('/api/devices/', {
     headers: {
       'Authorization': `Token ${authToken}`,
       'Content-Type': 'application/json'
     }
   })
   .then(response => response.json())
   .then(data => console.log(data));
   ```

### Creating Custom API Endpoints

If you need to create new endpoints to expose data:

1. Add a serializer in `sensor_portal/serializers.py`
2. Add a viewset in `sensor_portal/views.py`
3. Register the viewset in `sensor_portal/urls.py`
4. Restart the Django container:
   ```bash
   docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml restart sensor_portal_django
   ```

### Backend and Database Testing

- **Datamodels tests**
   -checks that the backend can create models in backend and database
   -makes sure the api works appropriately
- **observation tests**
   -checks creation of models
   -make sure the api endpoints related to the observations work appropriately

### Running the backend tests
```bash
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml exec sensor_portal_django pytest
```


### End-to-End (E2E) Testing

E2E testing verifies that the full application works as intended in an integrated environment. These tests mimic real user journeys from start to finish, ensuring that all layers—frontend, backend, and database—interact correctly. In our project, the E2E suite covers:

- **Authentication and Access**
    - Log in with valid credentials
    - Store the access token in `localStorage`
    - Automatically refresh tokens to maintain the session
- **Loading and Displaying Data**
    - Fetch the deployments list from the API
    - Render key fields (`site_name`, `deployment_ID`) in the table
- **Navigation and Detail Views**
    - Click into a specific deployment’s detail page
    - View associated data files and their metadata (file name, format, quality-check status)
- **User Interactions and API Calls**
    - Click the “Check Quality” button for a data file
    - Assert that the API returns status 200
    - Verify that the UI updates to reflect the API response
- **Robustness and State Handling**
    - Reload pages (`cy.reload()`) to confirm the app preserves state correctly
    - Check that data remains consistent after navigation and actions

### Running the E2E Tests
Before you begin, make sure the application is running as described earlier in this file. Then run: 

```bash
npm install
npx cypress open
```

This will launch Cypress’s test runner, where you can select and execute the “DeploymentsPage” spec (or any other E2E suite) in your browser.
